I realized that the um the halo swapping
stuff actually requires more of an
introduction than I um
so uh what I will do is I will go to the
it's it's it's on a GitHub page. So I
will go to the
uh
So let's share my screen.
So this is Oh, wait a sec for it to
finally appear.
Right. So this is the halo. So there's a
there's a so what I did uh many while
back a while back is I people
partly based on the the information from
that previous lecture people ask me what
happens what happens in practice. So
what I did is I I wrote a a a simple
benchmark where I have a I set the
processes up into a 3D grid and each of
them sends data up, down, left, right,
forward and backwards. And I just
thought of every possible way you could
do that. So um
um so I did pair-wise swapping each
using send receive. So basically you um
you do a send receive in every
direction. So that would be six send
receives up, down, left, right, forward,
backwards. Um, the reason why you have
to use non-blocking is that if you issue
the receive first, you may never get to
the send. If you shoot the send first,
you may never get to the receive. But
what you can do is um do a trick where
you have a two pass thing and on the
first pass you split the processes into
odd and even um grids based on their so
odd and even um it's like it's called a
checkerboard red black algorithm. you
split your grid into into into two sets,
odd and even processes. And on the first
part, the odd processes send and even
ones uh well I call it red black here.
Um half the process send half receive
and then half receive and then half
send. So that's a bit like the send
receive but slightly different. Then I
did pairwise swapping each dimension in
turn. It's a bit like the send receive
but I did I send a non-blocking send a
receive and a wait or you can do a
non-blocking receive a send and a wait
or you can do non-blocking send and
non-blessing receive and await but this
is all in order then the thing which I
would I said should be the best
non-blocking come all dimension direct
one so you you issue six I receives six
I sends and you just do a wait all
I did the same thing with persistent
communications. And I also did
neighborhood collectives. I haven't
covered them here, but but neighborhood
head collectives are basically um
um
are basically um
a way of doing you you could halo
neighbor collectives allow you to do
halo swapping with a single call. So
there's a routine called NPI all to all
where you communicate every process
communicates with every other one. Uh
that's not what we want. Uh because we
don't want every process to communicate
with every other. We want every process
to communicate with the six nearest
neighboring processes. NPI neighborhall
to wall does that. It says communicate
with all your neighbors where the
neighbors are your six nearest neighbors
up down left right. I haven't had a
chance to cover that yet. But again um
so you know b this is what it does.
Okay. There's one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine different
is that nine nine ways of doing halo
swapping. Um, and if you look at the um,
for example, the actual code now, it's
written in forran. I normally apologize
for being in forran, but then I
shouldn't really because I half of you
are for programmers, so I won't
apologize. I have no I actually have no
objection to for at all. Although my for
may be a bit rubbish. Um,
the way I do it, there's a driver
routine, but it really does do something
fairly simple. Let's look at the send
receive. Get Halo send receive.
So, this does this says do Halo swap
with this number of repetitions.
This is the send buff. This is the
receive buff. This is the the number of
elements and carcom I I I I arranged the
uh processes in a 3D grid using
cartisian communicators.
And so this com data call basically just
um extracts all the information who your
neighbors are from the communicator.
It's just a setup routine. Um but then I
do something very very simple.
do IREP equals one to NRE. We do a
number of repetitions because we have to
do lots of if we did a single halo swap
it wouldn't take enough time. So we have
to do lots of them. A loop over the
dimensions which is XY Z. A loop over
the directions which is up and down. And
I basically do a send receive. And
there's a bit of jiggory pokery here but
basically that's it's looping over
number repetitions. So this is doing
explicitly um a thousand I think about a
thousand times. We'll see how many but
endage three ender is is two up and
down. So we're doing six 12 calls sorry
we're doing six calls to send receive.
Okay but that is doing them these
complete immediately you know they're
completing in terms we're doing an
ordering up down left right forward
backwards. Um if you look at the
uh the halo
uh I send I receive weight
all
here.
This basically
uh loops over the dimensions the
directions I have a request here. This
is send and receive. This is looping
over. This is looping over send and
receive. This is looping over uh three
dimensions. This is looping over three
direct sorry three dimensions between
looping over up and down and it calls um
uh it either calls an I receive or an I
send depending on what loop we are and
then it just does a wait all at the end
and the driver routine is very simple
it's called halo halo bench or you can
you can specify the size of the buffer
we're simply we're transmitting 10,000
doubles here. So that's 80
kilobytes roughly. We're doing it for a
th00and time max run. I run the I run
the whole benchmark three times because
there can be a warm up. So the first
time you do this, you may not get
reliable results. So I actually run the
whole thing. This is a recent edition. I
run it three times. But hopefully, you
know, as as um you should just be able
to run out the box and get and get
sensible results. So, um if we basically
just
um
so the instructions hopefully are
yeah
um
so download the code there to actually
doing that and then let's just check
this works I have to uh submit a
different job. Sorry, share a different
screen. Um
Oh, I've lost my Okay,
I
didn't seem to want to pick the U.
There we go.
So, wait for a second that to appear.
Okay. So, let's go up one. So, I'm in my
recone the Halo bench. Oh, well, I've
already done it, but I'm I I I did it to
this. Okay. Okay. Clone. See the Halo
bench. Make minus F make archer two.
There are some warnings because my
forrand isn't particularly good. I've
includ I've I've I've included the same
module twice in some tree it's
complaining about um and then um I would
like to run in the reservation
uh
so I will edit the code
I wanted to use the um
that reservation there.
Let me s batch.
So, by default, what it's doing is it's
running on eight nodes with 128 times
per node. So, we're running on um 1,024
processes in a 3D grid. Um let's see if
are we running yet? I'm running. Yeah.
Um so, there's only eight nodes in the
reservation. So you if you use the
reservation, you'll have to queue up a
bit, but um
um it's it runs longer than I remember
because it's doing it's completing that
because it does it runs the benchmark
three times.
But if we um
look at the output,
well I let's let that should work. So it
does seem to work. So if people want to
run that and have a look at the results
um you should see quite a clear
hierarchy of of of so what of of which
the best so it prints out the for each
method it prints out the bandwidth.
Actually, I'll
it prints out. Oops.
It it for each method send receive red,
black,
it prints out the uh how long it took
and it prints out the bandwidth, but it
runs it multiple times. So, you probably
want to look at the final one to to get
the the best answers. But try running
that. The things you can alter are um
that buffer is probably buffer size is
probably within the eagle limit. You can
make it larger if you make uh you have
to manually alter the number of
repetitions. So if you if you make the
buffer size bigger you have to make the
number of repetitions smaller to keep
the runtime sensible. Um as I said
that's in Halo bench. Just right at the
top
I've got buffers. They're doubles. has
10,000 doubles and I'm running each one
a thousand times. If you make this a
thousand time 10 times bigger, you
probably want to make that 10 times
smaller. You want to keep the run time
within about a second. Something like a
second is a number. So, I'll just let
people um if you have any problems
that did seem to run out the box. So um
oh you um
you won't be able to but I can uh
does get not work. So you should be able
to cut and paste the git um command from
the
um from the from the the website. But um
you will be able to if we go to um
well you can actually
so you should be able to copy it from
there.
You should be able to copy it from work
here to66 shared. So that so that you
don't have access to my home, but you
have you should have access to that
directory.
Okay. Well, okay. I see I see what you
mean. Yes, I I see what you mean. I keep
forgetting. No. Well, for me, I didn't
need to. This is a completely fresh
account for me, so I was able to get it,
but you should be able to um you can't.
So, so the permissions are quite strict
on Arch. You can't copy from people's
directories, but I've checked out a copy
in um
this you definitely can read from. You
shouldn't have to configure git. Well,
maybe I'm maybe I'm being
oversimplistic, but
that you should be able to copy from
that work tar should should be
accessible. uh individual user
directories are are quite strictly
permissioned.
Um
yeah, you should just be able to do it.
I am very naive. You should just be able
to I I'm using a vanilla account here.
This is just straight out the box. I
just did get clone blah. It worked for
me. If but if that doesn't work, you can
just you should be able to copy from
that work th6 shared. Um that yeah, that
should work for you.
So I didn't used to have that warm-up
phase but we discovered recently that
one of UCX or OFI has a very quite high
startup cost. I mean high as in a few
seconds. You wouldn't notice it in a
real program, but the first time you do
a send, receive, or something, it does
some setup. So, so I have that warm up.
I did it for three times. The first the
warm up, the second is supposed to be
real, and the third is supposed to check
the second one was reliable. Uh,
so let people just play around with
that. And um
um if you want to run on more than eight
nodes, you can, but you can't run in the
reservation. The reservation is only
eight nodes. uh you can run in the
normal short key which allows you to run
on up to I think 32 nodes. I might be
wrong. Um
so I'll just
I won't I'll be too I need I'm bit
dehydrated. I will be gone for two
minutes if I get some and then I will
maybe come back if people can have
people been able to run.
Yeah, fine. Good. So that's so I'll just
let you play around with a few things if
you want. I'll take a five minute break.
I just need some more water. I seem to
be qu dehydrated today. I will just be
back in five minutes then we can discuss
the results.
So it looks like um people to be able to
run. Um
if you're running the um reservation,
you may you would have to let's said if
you're running on eight nodes, there are
only eight nodes in the reservation. So
you will have to queue up for other
people. But let's have a look at some of
the numbers here. Um,
so if we look at the um,
so you'll see that it says you run 24
processes. It arranges them in a grid
which is 16 by 8 by 8. Each halo
contains 1,000 doubles to data is half a
megaby per process because we have um
uh six halos. So we have about 80
megabytes times six
500 150 megabytes of data and the clock
resolution. I will go to the bottom
because I think the third run should be
the most reliable bedroom on three. So
we'll see here that yeah
so send receive was uh
670 megabytes per second. Um surprising
the red black was which I which has a
bit more logic and was faster
but send receive I very much for
muchness in fact um there's nothing
magic about send receive if you
downloaded so send receive so the
problem about halo swap you do a send
and a receive is you do send first you
may block and never get to receive if
you do receive first you may block and
never get to the send receive is a
routine I don't really like but it
basically does the send and the receive
at the same time. However, if you looked
at it'll just do an I send and an I
receive and await no doubt and you can
see that not surprisingly actually it
looks like I receive it's it's almost
identical to I my guess here is do I
send I receive send weight for example
probably I mean look at that's
remarkably similar 669.5 69.4 before I
mean but these are all the 670
but then we get on to the uh
anything you do so anything where you
impose an order where you do the
dimensions in order you get a much
slower uh um
uh um
so you get a much a much slower uh than
if you do something where you do them
all at once. So I send I I receive I
send away tour gets over go over a
gigabyte per second um aggregate and
it's almost identical. The persistent is
the same and the neighbor collective is
the same. So these are all basically the
same thing.
You do non-blocking in every direction
and then you do a weight all uh and so
we're getting quite significant uh
increase from like 670 up to 108. That's
quite significant uh improvement. Um was
it worth doing the repetitions? Well, if
you look on the first run, send receive
is anomalously slow. It looks bad. Um
but that's just because it's the first
routine that's run. And so if we look at
the run two hopefully, yeah, we're back
up here. So that I didn't used to have
this this this this run NM but it it
does seem to uh yeah that does seem to
and the reason is um you know you're
sitting there doing halo swapping up
down left right okay you might say right
I'm waiting for the I'm going to rece
for for for a message from the guy up
the way that person could be on a
different node going over the network
whereas the communication from the
neighbor to the left could be on the
same note But it could be coming in
really quickly. That's why you don't
know what order these are going to come
in because some of them are coming from
off node, some of them coming from on
node. And so, you know, that's why
prescribing an order, I will receive, I
will do the communication up, down,
left, right, forwards, backwards, is is
a bad thing to do because the the the
time taken to do this communications
will vary vastly depending on a whole
number of factors. Even as simple as
whether your neighbor is on the same
node or on a different node. Um
we could try
um
trying you know a larger
Oh
and see if there's any difference here.
This is a This is a um
uh this is doing a much larger oops
a much larger message.
Um but um
fewer repetitions this this so I think
this is above the eagle limit which is
why it's taking a lot longer.
Is it running at all?
It's running at the moment, but
Is it finished? Yes.
So you can see that if we go to the end,
the third one,
uh yeah, we're getting
um similar results. Oh, the red blank
here. You can see it's interesting. You
wouldn't
But these are all at the 500 megabytes,
but yeah, we're up to the So again, you
know, these things win out by quite a
lot. Um and then we can maybe try again.
We could do Whoops.
We could do the opposite.
Sorry, I'm being a bit dopey. It's end
of a long day.
We could change it to be smaller.
236.
So you just watch them as they come out.
So again must be 5600 and yeah 7. So
this is yeah sim similar picture. Um
so the red black comes and goes but the
other ones are all very good. So so so
the results are all very different but I
mean we're getting um we're getting um
and you can see the bandwidth there as I
said it's like a gigabyte a second not
10 gigabytes a second because um you're
having lots of processes going down the
same network links. Uh you can you there
you can play some I'll do one uh final
trick which we could do um
um
um what am I trying to do? Um
what we could do is we could try and say
where our halo swap where are where are
ping pong results reliable? Well I could
do one task per node. Okay. So I can
basically say here I'm doing header
swapping between I'm doing this
benchmark but I'm doing it in the way
where we're not sharing a network
connection. We have eight nodes and we
have one task per node. Okay. So um so
that should we would expect that. Let's
go back to the default
um
which was that
just
Is that right?
Okay. Yes, it is.
Um,
yeah. Um
so
so yes you'll see we're getting um the
bandwidth is now um
uh uh 5 GB per second. Now we measured
10 with the ping pong. Remember the ping
pong is unidirectional. Here we've got
birectional. So my guess would be
this is each process is getting 5 GB per
second but the network is sustaining 10.
My guess being that there you know
you're get you're doing um birectional
comy whereas ping pong is not ping pong
is one way then the other. So you can
see that you know the fact that we're
getting a gigabyte per second not 10 or
or is due to the effect. So you can
whoops um
if we if we arrange the processes as one
per node which is more like the um
the uh
benchmark run two. Okay. Um they're all
muchness here. Um
so again this is interesting. Okay. This
shows okay this shows this is very
interesting. Okay. Not only is the
bandwidth much higher, the uh the the
the difference between the send receive
for example
and the persistent and this is very
that's because this is this is sort of a
load balance calculation
every process is doing the same thing
every direction is on the network so
there's you know they're all very
symmetrical here so so so this this idea
of so I suspect the reason we're not
that they're all similar if we're not
getting this load balance or this all
the communicators taking up at roughly
the same time so it doesn't matter if
you order them. That's my guess. Um but
I might be wrong but that that you can
play around with these things. It's
quite interesting. So okay that was
really all I had to say. Um I have a
hard cut off at four unfortunately as I
said I've slightly messed up on the
timing here. Um but um the um
the crux I'll stop sharing that there.
The crux of the um uh
of the um
the uh
collective uh lecture advanced
collection is that things like gather
and scatter look nice. If you remember
GA to scatter takes a data set and
splits it up into lots of sections. So
if you have a a large vector and you
want to send a portion of it to every
other process, which is something you
might want to do at the start of
calculation, you read it in on one
process and you want to that's fine. You
just do an NPI scatter and you send a
little section to each data to each
other process.
That does not generalize to 2D for a
whole bunch of reasons. uh because a 2D
decomposition it just has it's just more
complicated. So at first sight it looks
like oh I can't do scatter and gather
for distributing and collecting a 2D
data set uh distributed across two
dimensions. It turns out you can, but
you have to play around with um
um um MPI data types. Um and the trick
is you have to do something, it's
explained in the lecture, you have to do
something called NPI type resized.
Basically,
uh um you have to basically
um when you when you do sends and
receives in NPI, you you don't specify
you specify a count. you say send one of
these, send two of these, for example.
And so um and that is automatically
multiplied up by the size of the object.
That's clear how big an integer is or a
double is. But when a when an object is
a subarray or a vector where it has gaps
in it, it's not really clear how big it
is. And it turns out that NPI's
definition of how big a vector is is not
particularly useful. So you have to do a
rather nasty thing called npi type
create resize and tell npi look I know
you think this vector this subarray is
this size but I want you to think of it
as being this size and then you can you
can do various tricks and so it it's a
bit technical uh hopefully it's
explained in the lecture and there are
solutions there you can look at um but
the main thing is it's basically saying
that um it is possible to use things
like scatter and gamma for doing
distribution and collection of of of of
of something like a matrix um decomposed
across both its dimensions, but you have
to understand what you're doing and it
takes a bit of jiggory perky, but it is
worth doing because collectives will be
so much more efficient than doing it by
hand. And I'll just double check that
um
if you look there is a exercises
on the GitHub page.
There is
Uh well I've got a collected lot but
there is the directory and you will see
oh this so merge this is to do with um
um userdefined reductions which I'm not
going to cover here but for example npi
gather np2.c
these are all explained in the um in the
lectures and it explains what it's
trying to do here. Okay.
So this is so so the exercise is
explained in the in the comments at the
top which is maybe not particularly MP
gall says here the exercise.
Okay. So we have a matrix distributed
like this across this process grid. Uh
use commonly for API gathering and
restor.
So here we're doing a gather. So I
initialize a matrix like this. I want
you to pull it back together so we have
the correct layout on and it's slightly
confusing but there is a solution there
npi gather 2D sol
which does this by doing a deceptively
simple um
uh gather this npi gather v here but it
it requires um
a bit of jiggory pokery with this resize
vector which is this MPI type create
resized it's explained in the lectures,
but it's just it's a useful it's
basically telling you it looks like this
pattern is hard can't be done with
gather and scatter, but it can, but it
requires fairly in-depth knowledge of
data types and it's a bit technical, but
it's explained in the lecture. You can
look at it and I have to go over it if
you want, but there are solutions there
showing you how to do it. So, I'm sorry
I've got my timing slightly arry. Um,
but I think that's probably the
just it just that's it that you can use
gathering scatter for more complicated
patterns than just 1D decomposition with
associate with with with with trickery
with data types. So I have to go now
apologies but we'll start up again
tomorrow and tomorrow is focusing on um
using shared memory within MPI and there
are two ways of doing that. one is
hybrid MPI open MP and the other is to
use explicit um MPI as its own shared
arrays which are bit like open MP shared
arrays and I'll cover those tomorrow. So
we'll start again at 10:00 tomorrow and
hopefully the timing will go a bit
better tomorrow which is more like what
I've done before but okay so see you
tomorrow.
Thank you very much.